CT Public API docs (#5069)
cypress-io/cypress-documentation: docs/guides/component-testing/third-party-definitions.mdx

# Integrating with Cypress Component Testing

:::info
This feature is only available from Cypress 12.7.
:::

> Cypress ships official support for many popular libraries and frameworks, such as [React](/guides/component-testing/react/overview) and [Angular](/guides/component-testing/angular/overview). We constantly monitor what libraries developers are interested in and are always open to adding new ones to Cypress.
> 
> All officially supported libraries feature a first class onboarding experience, where we detect and scaffold the correct files, and a framework-specific `mount` adapter, to render your components. We call this collection of features a *Framework Definition*, since it defines the requirements for a library or framework to work in Cypress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cypress Component Testing includes [official support](/guides/component-testing/overview#Supported-Frameworks) for many popular libraries and frameworks such as [React](/guides/component-testing/react/overview), [Angular](/guides/component-testing/angular/overview), and [Vue](/guides/component-testing/vue/overview). All officially supported libraries feature a first class onboarding experience, where we detect and scaffold the correct files, and a framework-specific `mount` adapter to render your components. We call this collection of features a *Framework Definition* since it defines the requirements for a library or framework to work in Cypress.
```

> If your favorite library isn't featured, don't worry - we expose the same API we use internally for third parties to define their own Framework Definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your favorite library isn't featured, don't worry - we expose the same API we use internally for the Cypress community to define their own Framework Definitions.
```

- A [`package.json`](#packagejson) with the correct conventions

The Definition is required when users configure Component Testing for the first time. The Mount adapter is used to render components when writing tests.

To simplify this process, we recommend starting development using [our official template](https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-ct-definition-template).

## Framework Definition

Below is a minimal Framework Definition. Note that `defineFrameworkDefinition` is purely for type safety, similar to `defineConfig` in `cypress.config`.

There is one important convention; the `type` key in `defineFrameworkDefinition` should match the name of your package on npm, and should be named using one of the following conventions:

- `cypress-ct-*` 
- `@organization/cypress-ct-*` 

Some examples of valid names include:

- `cypress-ct-react-js`
- `cypress-ct-svelte-testing`
- `@cypress/cypress-ct-react`
- `@angular/cypress-ct-angular`

Cypress will look at `node_modules` when it starts up, and load all the Framework Definitions found based on this naming convention.

A simple example of a Framework Defintion for the [Solid.js](https://www.solidjs.com/) library might look like this:

> ```js

Author: How about: https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-documentation/pull/5069/commits/5b47f9521e5b1dfe7f2b8628e1001b14bba8cd01

  `,
});
```

> Our Framework Definition shows up in Cypress!

Reviewer: Worth mentioning that their entry will be marked as "Community" in the UI?

Author: [Sure thin](https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-documentation/pull/5069/commits/62f251d8b58a614ad91aac551fde4279bb95c650)

<DocsImage
  src="/img/guides/component-testing/framework-definition-1.png"
  alt="custom framework definition"
/>

We defined the `dependencies`, which are also correctly handled - we haven't installed them all, so Cypress is prompting us to do so:

<DocsImage
  src="/img/guides/component-testing/framework-definition-2.png"
  alt="required dependencies"
/>

## Mount Adapter

The second part of defining a Framework Definition is the Mount Adapter. This is the function that renders the component in your tests using `cy.mount()`. 

> By default, Cypress will look for this as a `mount` function that is a **named export** from the package. This should be written in a `index.mjs` file. This example is for a [Solid.js](https://www.solidjs.com/) mount adapter:

Author: I thought about this but it adds quite a bit of complexity:

- Users won't directly import these modules anyway - even if type definitions exist, they don't actually do anything for the end user.
- The build step is messy. Cypress (the server component) will *always* require the CJS entry - in this case, `definition.cjs`. Both our bundlers (webpack and vite) want an ES module. We would need two separate build steps - one for the Node.js entry and one for the ESM entry.

Having types for the Mount Adapter *is* very useful, though. We could have a build step for the Mount Adapter, but recommend writing the Definition in CJS? Or, we can have two `tsconfig.json` and run two build steps.

I can put together a template that does this and see what it looks like.

```js
import { getContainerEl, setupHooks } from "@cypress/mount-utils";
import { render } from "solid-js/web";

let dispose;

function cleanup() {
  dispose?.();
}

/**
 * @param {() => JSX.Element} - component to render
 */
export function mount(component, options = {}) {

>   const root = getContainerEl();

Reviewer: // Retrieve root DOM element that Cypress has prepared for this test

  dispose = render(() => component, root);

>   return cy.wait(0, { log: false }).then(() => {

Reviewer: Might be good to explain what's going on with the `cy.wait` - the async render workaround probably isn't obvious to most people

    if (options.log) {
      Cypress.log({
        name: "mount",
        message: "Mounted component",
      });
    }
  });
}

> // Cleanup after each test

Author: Let's go with between, it's more broad without getting into the implementation details. Thanks!

setupHooks(cleanup);
```

This is different for each library, but the concept is the same - identify how to mount or render a component in your library, and implement it in a function named `mount` in `index.mjs`.

> When a user configures Component Testing with your Framework Definition, their `supportFile` will contain the correct `mount` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user configures Component Testing with your Framework Definition we automatically configure a `cy.mount` command using your `mount` function in the Component Testing `supportFile`:
```

```js
import { mount } from '@lmiller1990/cypress-ct-solid-js'

Cypress.Commands.add('mount', mount)
```

## package.json

> The final thing you need is a correctly configured `package.json`. This example was created using [our official template](https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-ct-definition-template).
> 
> The main things to note is the `name` property, which follows the `@org/cypress-ct-*` convention, and is the `exports` property. The `node` entry points to the Framework Definition, and the `default` entry points to the Mount Adapter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final thing you need is a correctly configured `package.json`. This example was created using [our official template](https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-ct-definition-template).

There are two fields of note:
* `name`: Your package name which must follow the `cypress-ct-*`/`@org/cypress-ct-*` convention
* `exports`: Object referencing the two files we created to comprise the Framework Definition. The `node` entry points to the Definition file, and the `default` entry points to the Mount Adapter:
```

```json {2,5-8}
{
  "name": "@lmiller1990/cypress-ct-solid-js",
  "version": "0.0.4",
  "description": "Example Framework Definition for Cypress and Solid.js",
  "exports": {
    "node": "./definition.cjs",
    "default": "./index.mjs"
  },
  "files": [
    "package.json",
    "definition.cjs",
    "index.mjs"
  ],
  "dependencies": {
    "@cypress/mount-utils": "^4.0.0"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "solid-js": "^1.6.0"
  },
  "peerDependencies": {

>     "solid-js": "^1.6.0"

Reviewer: I wonder if we should suggest adding a `cypress` `peerDependency` to restrict what versions of Cypress a plugin has been validated against? Probably an extra layer of complexity that's unnecessary here

Author: I'll throw it in for good measure.

  }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Worth adding a blurb around writing tests? Even if we don't have examples/content might be nice to at least suggest it as a good idea

Author: I'll add some tests to the example repo so people have an idea of where to start.

Author: Done https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-documentation/pull/5069/commits/284dd59b64672a922a18a85fc6ab1a2b18aae138

## Publishing on npm

That's it! Publish your Framework Definition on npm and start using it.

## List of Framework Definitions

> If you want to share your Framework Definition with us, please send a Pull Request - we would be happy to feature a link to your package!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once your Framework Definition is published and ready for use we would be delighted to mention it in our documentation so other Cypress users on the same framework can find it. [Submit a Pull Request](https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-documentation/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)!
```

```js
import { mount } from '@lmiller1990/cypress-ct-solid-js'

Cypress.Commands.add('mount', mount)
```

## package.json

The final thing you need is a correctly configured `package.json`. This example was created using [our official template](https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-ct-definition-template).

There are two fields of note:
* `name`: Your package name which must follow the `cypress-ct-*`/`@org/cypress-ct-*` convention
* `exports`: Object referencing the two files we created to comprise the Framework Definition. The `node` entry points to the Definition file, and the `default` entry points to the Mount Adapter:

```json {2,5-8}
{
  "name": "@lmiller1990/cypress-ct-solid-js",
  "version": "0.0.4",
  "description": "Example Framework Definition for Cypress and Solid.js",
  "exports": {
    "node": "./definition.cjs",
    "default": "./index.mjs"
  },
  "files": [
    "package.json",
    "definition.cjs",
    "index.mjs"
  ],
  "dependencies": {
    "@cypress/mount-utils": "^4.0.0"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "solid-js": "^1.6.0"
  },
  "peerDependencies": {
    "solid-js": "^1.6.0"
    "cypress": "^12.7.0"
  }
}
```

## Testing

> If you develop the Framework Definition file using TypeScript, for example by using [our official template](https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress-ct-definition-template), as long as you don't have any compile time errors, everything should work as expected. If you do run into unexpected behavior, please [file an issue](https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress/issues).

Author: Worth noting we've got better warnings for definitions coming VERY soon (next sprint) https://github.com/cypress-io/cypress/issues/25838 but they are not supported **right now**. The issue requires the docs to be updated when they are added.

/>

We defined the `dependencies`, which are also correctly handled - we haven't
installed them all, so Cypress is prompting us to do so:

<DocsImage
  src="/img/guides/component-testing/framework-definition-2.png"
  alt="required dependencies"
/>

## Mount Adapter

The second part of defining a Framework Definition is the Mount Adapter. This is
the function that renders the component in your tests using `cy.mount()`.

By default, Cypress will look for this as a `mount` function that is a **named
export** from the package. This should be written in a `index.mjs` file. This
example is for a [Solid.js](https://www.solidjs.com/) mount adapter:

```js
import { getContainerEl, setupHooks } from '@cypress/mount-utils'
import { render } from 'solid-js/web'

let dispose

function cleanup() {
  dispose?.()
}

/**
 * @param {() => JSX.Element} - component to render
 */
export function mount(component, options = {}) {
  // Retrieve root DOM element that Cypress has prepared for this test
  const root = getContainerEl()

  dispose = render(() => component, root)

  // Wait until next microtick to ensure any async render logic has executed
  return cy.wait(0, { log: false }).then(() => {

>     if (options.log) {

Reviewer 2: This won't work unless we check the value of `options.log`. We're assuming that it's true here but that's not the case unless it is explicitly set. Should we change this to

```suggestion
    if (options.log !== false) {
```
